Notification policy (#94)
spacelift-io/user-documentation: docs/concepts/policy/notification-policy.md

# Notification policy

## Purpose

> Notification [policies](./README.md) can be used to filter, route and adjust the body of notification messages sent by Spacelift. The policy works at the [space level](LINK TO SPACES HERE. NOT YET MERGED)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notification [policies](./README.md) can be used to filter, route and adjust the body of notification messages sent by Spacelift. The policy works at the [space level](../spaces/README.md)
```

      },
      "drift_detection": "boolean",
      "created_at": "number (timestamp in nanoseconds)",
      "id": "string",
      "runtime_config": {
        "before_init": ["string"],
        "environment": "map[string]string",
        "project_root": "string",
        "runner_image": "string",
        "terraform_version": "string"
      },
      "state": "string",
      "triggered_by": "string or null",
      "type": "string - PROPOSED or TRACKED",
      "updated_at": "number (timestamp in nanoseconds)"
    },
   "stack": {
      "administrative": "boolean",
      "autodeploy": "boolean",
      "autoretry": "boolean",
      "branch": "string",
      "id": "string",
      "labels": ["string"],
      "locked_by": "string or null",
      "name": "string",
      "namespace": "string or null",
      "project_root": "string or null",
      "repository": "string",
      "state": "string",
      "terraform_version": "string or null"
    }
  },
  "webhook_endpoints": [
    {
      "id": "custom-hook2",
      "labels": [
        "example-label1",
        "example-label2"
        ],
     }
  ],
  "internal_error": {
    "error": "string",
    "message": "string",

>     "severity": "string - INFO, WARNING, ERROR"

Reviewer 2: btw - I think the same issue exists in the example policy shown in the frontend.

}
```

!!! warning

>     The final JSON object received as input will depend on the type of the notification being sent. For example you will always receive `webhook_endpoints` data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The final JSON object received as input will depend on the type of notification being sent. For example, you will always receive `webhook_endpoints` data
```

>     but will only receive `interal_error` object if the notification is an internal error or `run_updated` object if notification is about

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    but will only receive the `internal_error` object if the notification is an internal error or the `run_updated` object if notification is about
```

    a [run](../run/README.md) being updated.

> ## Policy in practice

Reviewer 2: I think it'd be worth adding a section to this that explains how internal errors work, and in particular points out that you can only handle them with policies in the root space. That tripped me up.

Author: > that you can only handle them with policies in the root space.

That's not 100% right. Root space is only used if the notification has no stack/policy or whatever that belongs to a different space. Or at least thats how it should be.

Reviewer 2: Interesting - maybe I tested it wrong, but I only got it working in the root space. I'll re-test when I take a look at the webhooks testing.

Reviewer 2: You're totally right. I must have done something weird when testing that on Tuesday.

Using the notification policy you can completely re-write notifications or control where and when they are sent. Let's look in into how
the policy works for each of the defined routes.

### Inbox notifications

> Inbox notifications are what you receive in your Spacelift notification inbox. By default these are errors that happened during

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inbox notifications are what you receive in your Spacelift notification inbox. By default, these are errors that happened during
```

some kind of action execution inside Spacelift and are always sent even if you do not have a policy created.
However using the policy allows you to alter the body of those errors to add additional context, or even more importantly
it allows you to create your own unique notifications.

The inbox rule accepts multiple configurable parameters:

- `title` - a custom title for the message (**Optional**)
- `body` - a custom message body (**Optional**)
- `severity` - the severity level for the message (**Optional**)

#### Creating new inbox notifications

For example here is a inbox rule which will send `INFO` level notification messages to your inbox
when a tracked run has finished:

```opa
package spacelift

 inbox[{
  "title": "Tracked run finished!",

>   "body": sprintf("http://spc.app.spacelift.dev/stack/%s/run/%s has finished", [stack.id, run.id]),

Reviewer: We should not leak internal domain names. The examples should use generic domain names such as `[example](http://example.app.spacelift.io)`.

  "severity": "INFO",
 }] {
   stack := input.run_updated.stack
   run := input.run_updated.run
   run.type == "TRACKED"
   run.state == "FINISHED"
 }
```

[View the example in the rego playground](https://play.openpolicyagent.org/p/WGRgvTbU77){: rel="nofollow"}.

### Slack messages

[Slack](../../integrations/slack.md) messages can also be controlled using the notification policy, but before creating any policies that interact with slack
you will need to [add the slack integration to your Spacelift account](../../integrations/slack.md#linking-your-spacelift-account-to-the-slack-workspace).

!!! info
    Documentation section about [Slack](../../integrations/slack.md) includes additional information like: available actions,
    slack access policies and more. Consider exploring that part of documentation first.

Another important point to mention is that the rules for slack require a `channel_id` to be defined, it can be easily found at the bottom of a channel's details section:

> ![](../../assets/screenshots/slack_channel_details.png)

Reviewer: For consistency, the screenshots should use the light theme.

Now you should be ready to define rules for routing slack messages. Slack rules allow you to do the same filtering
decisions as any other rule in the policy. They also allow you to edit the message bodies themselves in order to create custom messages.

The slack rules accept multiple configurable parameters:

- `channel_id` - the slack channel to which the message will be delivered (**Required**)
- `message` - a custom message to be sent (**Optional**)

#### Filtering and routing messages

For example if you wanted to receive only finished runs on a specific slack channel you would define a rule like this:

```opa
package spacelift

slack[{"channel_id": "C0000000000"}] {
  input.run_updated != null

  run := input.run_updated.run
  run.state == "FINISHED"
}
```

[View the example in the rego playground](https://play.openpolicyagent.org/p/kPtk55QHPK){: rel="nofollow"}.

#### Changing the message body

Together with filtering and routing messages you can also alter the message body itself, here is an example
for sending a custom message where a run which tries to attach a policy requires confirmation:

```opa
package spacelift

slack[{
  "channel_id": "C0000000000",

>   "message": sprintf("http://spc.app.spacelift.tf/stack/%s/run/%s is trying to attach a policy!", [stack.id, run.id]),

Reviewer: The examples should use generic domain names such as `[example](http://example.app.spacelift.io)`.

}] {
  stack := input.run_updated.stack
  run := input.run_updated.run
  run.type == "TRACKED"
  run.state == "UNCONFIRMED"
  change := run.changes[_]
  change.phase == "plan"
  change.entity.type == "spacelift_policy_attachment"
}
```

[View the example in the rego playground](https://play.openpolicyagent.org/p/KyN5EHeyhk){: rel="nofollow"}.

### Webhook requests

Webhook notifications are a very powerful part of the notification policy. Using them one is able to not only
receive webhooks on specific events that happen in Spacelift, but also craft unique requests to be consumed
by some third party.

> Notification policy relies on named webhooks which can be created and managed in the [Webhooks section of Spacelift](../../integrations/webhooks.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Notification policy relies on named webhooks which can be created and managed in the [Webhooks section of Spacelift](../../integrations/webhooks.md).
```

- `headers` - a key value map which will be appended to request headers (**Optional**)
- `payload` - a custom valid JSON object to be sent as request body (**Optional**)
- `method` - a HTTP method to use when sending the request (**Optional**)

#### Filtering webhook requests

Filtering and selecting webhooks can be done by using the received input data. Rules can be created where only
specific actions would trigger a webhook being sent.
For example we could define a rule which would allow a webhook to be sent about any drift detection run:

```opa
package spacelift

webhook[{"endpoint_id": endpoint.id}] {
  endpoint := input.webhook_endpoints[_]
  endpoint.id == "drift-hook"
  input.run_updated.run.drift_detection == true
  input.run_updated.run.type == "PROPOSED"
}
```

[View the example in the rego playground](https://play.openpolicyagent.org/p/qiMTWbTJxm){: rel="nofollow"}.

#### Creating a custom webhook request

All requests sent will always include the default headers for verification, a payload which is
appropriate for the message type and the `method` set as `POST`. However all that can be

> changed using the webhook rule. For example if we wanted to define a completely custom request for

Reviewer 2: "all that can be changed" makes me think that you can remove the verification headers by setting custom headers. Is that true? If not I think we should reword it.

# Notification policy 

## Purpose

> Notification [policies](./README.md) can be used to filter, route and adjust the body of notification messages sent by Spacelift. The policy works at [space level](LINK TO SPACES HERE. NOT YET MERGED) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Notification [policies](./README.md) can be used to filter, route and adjust the body of notification messages sent by Spacelift. The policy works at the [space level](LINK TO SPACES HERE. NOT YET MERGED) 
```

#### Creating new inbox notifications 

For example here is a inbox rule which will send `INFO` level notification messages to your inbox
when a tracked run has finished:

```opa
package spacelift

 inbox[{
  "title": "Tracked run finished!",
  "body": sprintf("http://spc.app.spacelift.dev/stack/%s/run/%s has finished", [stack.id, run.id]),
  "severity": "INFO",
 }] {
   stack := input.run_updated.stack
   run := input.run_updated.run
   run.type == "TRACKED"
   run.state == "FINISHED"
 }
```

[View the example in the rego playground](https://play.openpolicyagent.org/p/WGRgvTbU77){: rel="nofollow"}.

### Slack messages 

[Slack](../../integrations/slack.md) messages can also be controlled using the notification policy, but before creating any policies that interact with slack
you will need to [add the slack integration to your Spacelift account](../../integrations/slack.md#linking-your-spacelift-account-to-the-slack-workspace).

!!! info
    Documentation section about [Slack](../../integrations/slack.md) includes additional information like: available actions,
    slack access policies and more. Consider exploring that part of documentation first.

> Another important point ot mention is that the rules for slack require a `channel_id` to be defined, it can be easily found at the bottom of a channel's details section:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another important point to mention is that the rules for slack require a `channel_id` to be defined, it can be easily found at the bottom of a channel's details section:
```

```opa
package spacelift

slack[{
  "channel_id": "C0000000000",
  "message": sprintf("http://spc.app.spacelift.tf/stack/%s/run/%s is trying to attach a policy!", [stack.id, run.id]),
}] {
  stack := input.run_updated.stack
  run := input.run_updated.run
  run.type == "TRACKED"
  run.state == "UNCONFIRMED"
  change := run.changes[_]
  change.phase == "plan"
  change.entity.type == "spacelift_policy_attachment"
}
```

[View the example in the rego playground](https://play.openpolicyagent.org/p/KyN5EHeyhk){: rel="nofollow"}.

### Webhook requests 

Webhook notifications are a very powerful part of the notification policy. Using them one is able to not only
receive webhooks on specific events that happen in Spacelift, but also craft unique requests to be consumed
by some third party.

Notification policy relies on named webhooks which can be created and managed in the [Webhooks section of Spacelift](../../integrations/webhooks.md).
Any policy evaluation will always receive a list of possible webhooks together with their labels as input.
The data received in policy input should be used to determine which webhook will be used when sending the request.

!!! info

>     This section of documentation requires you to be knowledgeable about [Named Webhooks](../../integrations/webhooks.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    This section of documentation requires you have configured at least one [Named Webhook](../../integrations/webhooks.md).
```

    Consider exploring that part of documentation first.

The webhook policy accepts multiple configurable parameters:

- `endpoint_id` - endpoint id (slug) to which the webhook will be delivered  (**Required**)
- `headers` - a key value map which will be appended to request headers (**Optional**)
- `payload` - a custom valid JSON object to be sent as request body (**Optional**)
- `method` - a HTTP method to use when sending the request (**Optional**)

#### Filtering webhook requests

Comparison operations for inside the webhook rule can be done in the same fashion as other rules.
It receives the same input data and it can be used to create rules where only specific actions would trigger a webhook being sent.

> For example we could define a rule which would send a webhook request when a run to check for drift detection runs:

Reviewer 3: im not sure what you're trying to say here.

Author: updated this part

# Notification policy

## Purpose

Notification [policies](./README.md) can be used to filter, route and adjust the body of notification messages sent by Spacelift. The policy works at the [space level](../spaces/README.md)

> meaning that it does not need to be attached to a specific [stack](../stack/README.md), but rather is always evaluated if it can be accessed.

Reviewer 4: > if it can be accessed

So when exactly? Or the actual question - when is it ignored?

It's also important to note that all notifications go through the notification policy evaluation,

> so depending on the rules defined any message can be directed to any provided route.

Reviewer 4: Suggestion:

> All notifications evaluate notification policy. This means they can be redirected to routes provided in the policy.

A notification policy can define the following rules:

- **inbox** - allows messages to be routed to the Spacelift notification inbox;
- **slack** - allows to route messages to a given slack channel;
- **webhook** - allows to route messages to a given webhook;

If no rules match no action is taken.

## Data input

This is the schema of the data input that each policy request can receive:

```json
{
  "run_updated:":{
    "state":"string",
    "username":"string",
    "note":"string",
    "run":{
      "creator_session":{
        "admin":"boolean",
        "creator_ip":"string",
        "login":"string",
        "name":"string",
        "teams":[
          "string"
        ],
        "machine":"boolean - whether the run was kicked off by a human or a machine"
      },
      "drift_detection":"boolean",
      "created_at":"number (timestamp in nanoseconds)",
      "id":"string",
      "runtime_config":{
        "before_init":[
          "string"
        ],
        "environment":"map[string]string",
        "project_root":"string",
        "runner_image":"string",
        "terraform_version":"string"
      },
      "state":"string",

>       "triggered_by":"string or null",

Reviewer 4: What does the string identify? Would be great if you could follow your fantastic timestamp field description.

Author: I mean.. it's a run object with `trigged_by` field, isn't it kinda obvious that it's just who triggered the run? I don't think it's need a description of any sort 🤷🏻

Reviewer 4: I think runs can be triggered by vcs events, users (manually) and cronjobs at least?

Author: It's again easy to make a comment that lies here 🤷🏻 Also I don't know how you would describe this:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/40318863/205290101-8fbadf70-0ad9-4d84-b9a9-dea6e44981e6.png)

You can always also just sample the policy and see what you get for each action. I mean I can try to describe something here, Im just not sure how useful that is.

Reviewer 4: sure, you can leave as is

      "type":"string - PROPOSED or TRACKED",
      "updated_at":"number (timestamp in nanoseconds)"
    },
    "stack":{
      "administrative":"boolean",
      "autodeploy":"boolean",
      "autoretry":"boolean",
      "branch":"string",
      "id":"string",
      "labels":[
        "string"
      ],

>       "locked_by":"string or null",

Reviewer 4: same as above

      "name":"string",
      "namespace":"string or null",
      "project_root":"string or null",
      "repository":"string",
      "state":"string",
      "terraform_version":"string or null"
    }
  },
  "webhook_endpoints":[
    {
      "id":"custom-hook2",
      "labels":[
        "example-label1",
        "example-label2"
      ]
    }
  ],
  "internal_error":{
    "error":"string",
    "message":"string",
    "severity":"string - INFO, WARNING, ERROR"
  }
}
```

!!! warning
    The final JSON object received as input will depend on the type of notification being sent. For example, you will always receive `webhook_endpoints` data
    but will only receive the `internal_error` object if the notification is an internal error or the `run_updated` object if notification is about
    a [run](../run/README.md) being updated.

## Policy in practice

Using the notification policy, you can completely re-write notifications or control where and when they are sent. Let's look into how
the policy works for each of the defined routes.

### Choosing a space for your policy

> When creating notification policies you should take in to account the space in which you're creating the them.

Reviewer 4: > should take in to account
`in to` => `into`

> which you're creating the them.
`creating the them` => `creating them`

> Generally the policy follows the same conventions as any other Spacelift componenet, with a few small caviats.

Reviewer 4: `caviats` => `caveats`

#### Determining space for run update notifications

Run update messages will rely on the space that the run is happening in.
It will check any policies in that space including policies inherited from other spaces.

#### Determining space for internal errors

> Most internal errors will check for a notification policies inside of the root space.

Reviewer 4: > check for a notification policies
I think it's either `check for notification policies` or `check for a notification policy`

> However if the policy is reporting about a componenet that belongs to a certain space

Reviewer 4: `componenet` => `component`

you will need to [add the slack integration to your Spacelift account](../../integrations/slack.md#linking-your-spacelift-account-to-the-slack-workspace).

!!! info
    The documentation section about [Slack](../../integrations/slack.md) includes additional information like: available actions,
    slack access policies and more. Consider exploring that part of documentation first.

Another important point to mention is that the rules for slack require a `channel_id` to be defined. This can be found at the bottom of a channel's _About_ section in Slack:

![](../../assets/screenshots/slack-channel-info.png)

Now you should be ready to define rules for routing slack messages. Slack rules allow you to make the same filtering
decisions as any other rule in the policy. They also allow you to edit the message bodies themselves in order to create custom messages.

The slack rules accept multiple configurable parameters:

- `channel_id` - the slack channel to which the message will be delivered (**Required**)
- `message` - a custom message to be sent (**Optional**)

#### Filtering and routing messages

> For example if you wanted to receive only finished runs on a specific slack channel you would define a rule like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example if you wanted to receive only finished runs on a specific Slack channel you would define a rule like this:
```

```opa
package spacelift

slack[{"channel_id": "C0000000000"}] {
  input.run_updated != null

  run := input.run_updated.run
  run.state == "FINISHED"
}
```

[View the example in the rego playground](https://play.openpolicyagent.org/p/kPtk55QHPK){: rel="nofollow"}.

#### Changing the message body

Together with filtering and routing messages you can also alter the message body itself, here is an example
for sending a custom message where a run which tries to attach a policy requires confirmation:

```opa
package spacelift

slack[{
  "channel_id": "C0000000000",
  "message": sprintf("http://example.app.spacelift.io/stack/%s/run/%s is trying to attach a policy!", [stack.id, run.id]),
}] {
  stack := input.run_updated.stack
  run := input.run_updated.run
  run.type == "TRACKED"
  run.state == "UNCONFIRMED"
  change := run.changes[_]
  change.phase == "plan"
  change.entity.type == "spacelift_policy_attachment"
}
```

[View the example in the rego playground](https://play.openpolicyagent.org/p/KyN5EHeyhk){: rel="nofollow"}.

### Webhook requests

> Webhook notifications are a very powerful part of the notification policy. Using them one is able to not only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Webhook notifications are a very powerful part of the notification policy. Using them, one is able to not only
```

receive webhooks on specific events that happen in Spacelift, but also craft unique requests to be consumed
by some third party.

The notification policy relies on named webhooks which can be created and managed in the [Webhooks section of Spacelift](../../integrations/webhooks.md).
Any policy evaluation will always receive a list of possible webhooks together with their labels as input.

> The data received in policy input should be used to determine which webhook will be used when sending the request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The data received in the policy input should be used to determine which webhook will be used when sending the request.
```

!!! info
    This section of documentation requires you have configured at least one [Named Webhook](../../integrations/webhooks.md).

>     Consider exploring that part of documentation first.

Reviewer: Sicne you recommend reading that othert section first, you might want to display this recommendation earlier.

The webhook policy accepts multiple configurable parameters:

- `endpoint_id` - endpoint id (slug) to which the webhook will be delivered  (**Required**)
- `headers` - a key value map which will be appended to request headers (**Optional**)
- `payload` - a custom valid JSON object to be sent as request body (**Optional**)
- `method` - a HTTP method to use when sending the request (**Optional**)

#### Filtering webhook requests

Filtering and selecting webhooks can be done by using the received input data. Rules can be created where only
specific actions should trigger a webhook being sent.
For example we could define a rule which would allow a webhook to be sent about any drift detection run:

```opa
package spacelift

webhook[{"endpoint_id": endpoint.id}] {
  endpoint := input.webhook_endpoints[_]
  endpoint.id == "drift-hook"
  input.run_updated.run.drift_detection == true
  input.run_updated.run.type == "PROPOSED"
}
```

[View the example in the rego playground](https://play.openpolicyagent.org/p/qiMTWbTJxm){: rel="nofollow"}.

#### Creating a custom webhook request

All requests sent will always include the default headers for verification, a payload which is

> appropriate for the message type and the `method` set as `POST`. However by using the webhook rule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
appropriate for the message type and the `method` set as `POST`. However, by using the webhook rule
```

we can modify the body of the request, change the method or add additional headers.

> For example if we wanted to define a completely custom request for a [tracked run](../run/README.md) we would define a rule like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if we wanted to define a completely custom request for a [tracked run](../run/README.md) we would define a rule like this:
```

## Purpose

Notification [policies](./README.md) can be used to filter, route and adjust the body of notification messages sent by Spacelift. The policy works at the [space level](../spaces/README.md)
meaning that it does not need to be attached to a specific [stack](../stack/README.md), but rather is always evaluated if the space its in can be accessed by whatever action is being evaluated.
It's also important to note that all notifications go through the policy evaluation.

> This means any of the can be redirected to routes defined in the policy.

Reviewer 4: > any of the can

I think there is a typo?

A notification policy can define the following rules:

- **inbox** - allows messages to be routed to the Spacelift notification inbox;
- **slack** - allows to route messages to a given slack channel;

> - **webhook** - allows to route messages to a given webhook;

Reviewer 2: @tomasmik can you make the same change to the slack and webhook bullets for consistency? I should have pointed them out as well, but just figured you'd notice it.

Using the notification policy, you can completely re-write notifications or control where and when they are sent. Let's look into how
the policy works for each of the defined routes.

### Choosing a space for your policy

> When creating notification policies you should take in to account the space in which you're creating the them.

Reviewer 2: "creating the them" has an extra "the"

> Generally the policy follows the same conventions as any other Spacelift componenet, with a few small caviats.

Reviewer 2: s/componenet/component

I think you need to do a find and replace - it's like this in a few places.

#### Determining space for run update notifications

Run update messages will rely on the space that the run is happening in.
It will check any policies in that space including policies inherited from other spaces.

#### Determining space for internal errors

> Most internal errors will check for a notification policies inside of the root space.

Reviewer 2: s/check for a notification policies/check for notification policies
